<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">

<h2>
			<span>CHAPTER IX</span>
			<span class="smaller">THE LABYRINTHODON</span>
		</h2>

		<p>You imagine them fleeing through our complex and difficult social
system, as it were, for life, first on foot and severally to the
Folkestone Central Station; then in a first-class carriage, with Kipps'
bag as sole chaperone to Charing Cross, and then in a four-wheeler, a
long, rumbling, palpitating, slow flight through the multitudinous
swarming London streets to Sid. Kipps kept peeping out of the window.
"It's the next corner after this, I believe," he would say. For he had a
sort of feeling that at Sid's he would be immune from the hottest
pursuits. He paid the cabman in a manner adequate to the occasion and
turned to his prospective brother-in-law. "Me and Ann," he said, "we're
going to marry."</p>
		<p>"But I thought——" began Sid.</p>
		<p>Kipps motioned him towards explanations in the shop....</p>
		<p>"It's no good, my arguing with you," said Sid, smiling delightedly as
the case unfolded. "You done it now." And Masterman being apprised of
the nature of the affair descended slowly in a state of flushed
congratulation.</p>
		<p>"I thought you might find the Higher Life a bit difficult," said
Masterman, projecting a bony hand. "But I never thought you'd have the
originality to clear out.... Won't the young lady of the superior
classes swear! Never mind—it doesn't matter anyhow.</p>
		<p>"You were starting a climb," he said at dinner, "that doesn't lead
anywhere. You would have clambered from one refinement of vulgarity to
another and never got to any satisfactory top. There isn't a top. It's a
squirrel's cage. Things are out of joint, and the only top there is is a
lot of blazing card playing women and betting men—you should read
Modern Society—seasoned with archbishops and officials and all that
sort of glossy, pandering Bosh.... You'd have hung on, a disconsolate,
dismal, little figure, somewhere up the ladder, far below even the
motor-car class, while your wife larked about—or fretted because she
wasn't a bit higher than she was.... I found it all out long ago. I've
seen women of that sort. And I don't climb any more."</p>
		<p>"I often thought about what you said last time I saw you," said Kipps.</p>
		<p>"I wonder what I said," said Masterman in parenthesis. "Anyhow, you're
doing the right and sane thing, and that's a rare spectacle. You're
going to marry your equal, and you're going to take your own line, quite
independently of what people up there, or people down there, think you
ought or ought not to do. That's about the only course one can take
nowadays with everything getting more muddled and upside down every day.
Make your own little world and your own house first of all, keep that
right side up whatever you do, and marry your mate.... That, I suppose,
is what <i>I</i> should do—if <i>I</i> had a mate.... But people of my sort,
luckily for the world, don't get made in pairs. No!</p>
		<p>"Besides——! However——" And abruptly, taking advantage of an
interruption by Master Walt, he lapsed into thought.</p>
		<p>Presently he came out of his musings.</p>
		<p>"After all," he said, "there's hope."</p>
		<p>"What about?" said Sid.</p>
		<p>"Everything," said Masterman.</p>
		<p>"Where there's life there's hope," said Mrs. Sid. "But none of you
aren't eating anything like you ought to."</p>
		<p>Masterman lifted his glass.</p>
		<p>"Here's to Hope!" he said, "The Light of the World!"</p>
		<p>Sid beamed at Kipps as who should say, "You don't meet a character like
<i>this</i> every dinner time."</p>
		<p>"Here's to Hope," repeated Masterman. "The best thing one can have. Hope
of life—yes."</p>
		<p>He imposed his movement of magnificent self-pity on them all. Even young
Walt was impressed.</p>
		<p>They spent the days before their marriage in a number of agreeable
excursions together. One day they went to Kew by steamboat, and admired
the house full of paintings of flowers extremely; and one day they went
early to have a good, long day at the Crystal Palace, and enjoyed
themselves very much indeed. They got there so early that nothing was
open inside, all the stalls were wrappered up and all the minor
exhibitions locked and barred; they seemed the minutest creatures even
to themselves in that enormous empty aisle and their echoing footsteps
indecently loud. They contemplated realistic groups of plaster savages,
and Ann thought they'd be queer people to have about. She was glad there
were none in this country. They meditated upon replicas of classical
statuary without excessive comment. Kipps said at large, it must have
been a queer world then, but Ann very properly doubted if they really
went about like that. But the place at that early hour was really
lonely. One began to fancy things. So they went out into the October
sunshine of the mighty terraces, and wandered amidst miles of stucco
tanks and about those quiet Gargantuan grounds. A great, grey emptiness
it was, and it seemed marvellous to them, but not nearly so marvellous
as it might have seemed. "I never see a finer place, never," said Kipps,
turning to survey the entirety of the enormous glass front with Paxton's
vast image in the centre.</p>
		<p>"What it must 'ave cost to build!" said Ann, and left her sentence
eloquently incomplete.</p>
		<p>Presently they came to a region of caves and waterways, and amidst these
waterways strange reminders of the possibilities of the Creator. They
passed under an arch made of a whale's jaws, and discovered amidst
herbage, as if they were browsing or standing unoccupied and staring as
if amazed at themselves, huge effigies of iguanodons and deinotheria and
mastodons and suchlike cattle, gloriously done in green and gold.</p>
		<p>"They got everything," said Kipps. "Earl's Court isn't a patch on it."</p>
		<p>His mind was very greatly exercised by these monsters, and he hovered
about them and returned to them. "You'd wonder 'ow they ever got enough
to eat," he said several times.</p>

		<p>It was later in the day, and upon a seat in the presence of the green
and gold Labyrinthodon that looms so splendidly above the lake, that the
Kippses fell into talk about their future. They had made a sufficient
lunch in the palace, they had seen pictures and no end of remarkable
things, and that and the amber sunlight made a mood for them, quiet and
philosophical, a heaven mood. Kipps broke a contemplative silence with
an abrupt illusion to one principal preoccupation. "I shall offer an
'pology and I shall offer 'er brother damages. If she likes to bring an
action for Breach after that, well—I done all I can.... They can't get
much out of reading my letters in court, because I didn't write none. I
dessay a thousan' or two'll settle all that, anyhow. I ain't much
worried about that. That don't worry me very much, Ann—No."</p>
		<p>And then, "It's a lark, our marrying. It's curious 'ow things come
about. If I 'adn't run against you, where should I 'ave been now. Eh?...
Even after we met, I didn't seem to see it like—not marrying you I
mean—until that night I came. I didn't—reely."</p>
		<p>"I didn't neither," said Ann, with thoughtful eyes on the water.</p>
		<p>For a time Kipps' mind was occupied by the prettiness of her thinking
face. A faint, tremulous network of lights reflected from the ripples of
a passing duck, played subtly over her cheek and faded away.</p>
		<p>Ann reflected. "I s'pose things 'ad to be," she said.</p>
		<p>Kipps mused. "It's curious 'ow ever I got on to be engaged to 'er."</p>
		<p>"She wasn't suited to you," said Ann.</p>
		<p>"Suited. No fear! That's jest it. 'Ow did it come about?"</p>
		<p>"I expect she led you on," said Ann.</p>
		<p>Kipps was half-minded to assent. Then he had a twinge of conscience. "It
wasn't that, Ann," he said. "It's curious. I don't know what it was, but
it wasn't that. I don't recollect.... No.... Life's jolly rum; that's
one thing any'ow. And I suppose I'm a rum sort of feller. I get excited
sometimes, and then I don't seem to care <i>what</i> I do. That's about what
it was reely. Still——"</p>
		<p>They meditated, Kipps with his arms folded and pulling at his scanty
moustache. Presently a faint smile came over his face.</p>
		<p>"We'll get a nice <i>little</i> 'ouse out Ithe way."</p>
		<p>"It's 'omelier than Folkestone," said Ann.</p>
		<p>"Jest a nice <i>little</i> 'ouse," said Kipps. "There's Hughenden, of course.
But that's let. Besides being miles too big. And I wouldn't live in
Folkestone again some'ow—not for anything."</p>
		<p>"I'd like to 'ave a 'ouse of my own," said Ann. "I've often thought,
being in service, 'ow much I'd like to manage a 'ouse of my own."</p>
		<p>"You'd know all about what the servants was up to, anyhow," said Kipps,
amused.</p>
		<p>"Servants! We don't want no servants," said Ann, startled.</p>
		<p>"You'll 'ave to 'ave a servant," said Kipps. "If it's only to do the
'eavy work of the 'ouse."</p>
		<p>"What! and not be able 'ardly to go into my own kitchen?" said Ann.</p>
		<p>"You ought to 'ave a servant," said Kipps.</p>
		<p>"One could easy 'ave a woman in for anything that's 'eavy," said Ann.
"Besides—— If I 'ad one of the girls one sees about nowadays I should
want to be taking the broom out of 'er 'and and do it all over myself.
I'd manage better without 'er."</p>
		<p>"We ought to 'ave one servant anyhow," said Kipps, "else 'ow should we
manage if we wanted to go out together or anything like that?"</p>
		<p>"I might get a <i>young</i> girl," said Ann, "and bring 'er up in my own
way."</p>
		<p>Kipps left the matter at that and came back to the house.</p>
		<p>"There's little 'ouses going into Hythe, just the sort we want, not too
big and not too small. We'll 'ave a kitching and a dining-room and a
little room to sit in of a night."</p>
		<p>"It mustn't be a 'ouse with a basement," said Ann.</p>
		<p>"What's a basement?"</p>
		<p>"It's a downstairs, where there's not arf enough light and everything
got to be carried—up and down, up and down, all day—coals and
everything. And it's got to 'ave a watertap and sink and things
upstairs. You'd 'ardly believe, Artie, if you 'adn't been in service,
'ow cruel and silly some 'ouses are built—you'd think they 'ad a spite
against servants the way the stairs are made."</p>
		<p>"We won't 'ave one of that sort," said Kipps....</p>
		<p>"We'll 'ave a quiet little life. Now go out a bit—now come 'ome again.
Read a book perhaps if we got nothing else to do. 'Ave old Buggins in
for an evening at times. 'Ave Sid down. There's bicycles——"</p>
		<p>"I don't fancy myself on a bicycle," said Ann.</p>
		<p>"'Ave a trailer," said Kipps, "and sit like a lady. I'd take you out to
New Romney easy as anything jest to see the old people."</p>
		<p>"I wouldn't mind that," said Ann.</p>

		<p>"We'll jest 'ave a sensible little 'ouse, and sensible things. No art
or anything of that sort, nothing stuck-up or anything, but jest
sensible. We'll be as right as anything, Ann."</p>
		<p>"No socialism," said Ann, starting a lurking doubt.</p>
		<p>"No socialism," said Kipps; "just sensible, that's all."</p>
		<p>"I dessay it's all right for them that understand it, Artie, but I don't
agree with this socialism."</p>
		<p>"I don't neither, reely," said Kipps. "I can't argue about it, but it
don't seem real like to me. All the same Masterman's a clever fellow,
Ann."</p>
		<p>"I didn't like 'im at first, Artie, but I do now—in a way. You don't
understand 'im all at once."</p>
		<p>"'E's so clever," said Kipps. "Arf the time I can't make out what 'e's
up to. 'E's the cleverest chap I ever met. I never 'eard such talking.
'E ought to write a book.... It's a rum world, Ann, when a chap like
that isn't 'ardly able to earn a living."</p>
		<p>"It's 'is 'ealth," said Ann.</p>
		<p>"I expect it is," said Kipps, and ceased to talk for a little while.</p>
		<p>Then he spoke with deliberation, "Sea air might be the saving of 'im,
Ann."</p>
		<p>He glanced doubtfully at Ann, and she was looking at him even fondly.</p>
		<p>"You think of other people a lot," said Ann. "I been looking at you
sittin' there and thinking."</p>

		<p>"I suppose I do. I suppose when one's 'appy one does."</p>
		<p>"<i>You</i> do," said Ann.</p>
		<p>"We shall be 'appy in that little 'ouse, Ann. Don't y' think?"</p>
		<p>She met his eyes and nodded.</p>
		<p>"I seem to see it," said Kipps, "sort of cosy like. 'Bout tea time and
muffins, kettle on the 'ob, cat on the 'earthrug. We must get a cat,
Ann, and <i>you</i> there. Eh?"</p>
		<p>They regarded each other with appreciative eyes and Kipps became
irrelevant.</p>
		<p>"I don't believe, Ann," he said, "I 'aven't kissed you not for 'arf an
hour. Leastways not since we was in those caves."</p>
		<p>For kissing had already ceased to be a matter of thrilling adventure for
them.</p>
		<p>Ann shook her head. "You be sensible and go on talking about Mr.
Masterman," she said....</p>
		<p>But Kipps had wandered to something else. "I like the way your 'air
turns back just there," he said, with an indicative finger. "It was like
that, I remember, when you was a girl. Sort of wavy. I've often thought
of it——.... 'Member when we raced that time—out be'ind the church?"</p>
		<p>Then for a time they sat idly, each following out agreeable meditations.</p>
		<p>"It's rum," said Kipps.</p>
		<p>"What's rum?"</p>
		<p>"'Ow everything's 'appened," said Kipps. "Who'd 'ave thought of our
being 'ere like this six weeks ago?... Who'd 'ave thought of my ever
'aving any money?"</p>
		<p>His eyes went to the big Labyrinthodon. He looked first carelessly and
then suddenly with a growing interest in its vast face.</p>
		<p>"I'm deshed," he murmured. Ann became interested. He laid a hand on her
arm and pointed. Ann scrutinised the Labyrinthodon and then came around
to Kipps' face in mute interrogation.</p>
		<p>"Don't you see it?" said Kipps.</p>
		<p>"See what?"</p>
		<p>"'E's jest <i>like</i> old Coote."</p>
		<p>"It's extinct," said Ann, not clearly apprehending.</p>
		<p>"I dessay 'e is. But 'e's jest like old Coote all the same for that."</p>
		<p>Kipps meditated on the monstrous shapes in sight. "I wonder 'ow all
these old antediluvium animals got extinct," he asked. "No one couldn't
possibly 'ave killed 'em."</p>
		<p>"Why! <i>I</i> know that," said Ann. "They was overtook by the Flood...."</p>
		<p>Kipps meditated for a while. "But I thought they had to take two of
everything there was——"</p>
		<p>"Within reason they 'ad," said Ann....</p>
		<p>The Kippses left it at that.</p>
		<p>The great green and gold Labyrinthodon took no notice of their
conversation. It gazed with its wonderful eyes over their heads into the
infinite—inflexibly calm. It might indeed have been Coote himself
there, Coote, the unassuming, cutting them dead....</p>

		<p>And in due course these two simple souls married, and Venus Urania, the
Goddess of Wedded Love, the Goddess of Tolerant Kindliness or Meeting
Half Way, to whom all young couples should pray and offer sacrifices of
self, who is indeed a very great and noble and kindly goddess, was in
some manner propitiated, and bent down and blessed them in their union.</p>
		<p class="tbrk"> </p>
		<p class="center">END OF BOOK II.</p>
		<hr/>

</section></body></html>
